>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, AUGUST 15:
A GUANTANAMO PRISONER ON A
HUNGER STRIKE CAUSES DEEP
DIVIDES WITHIN THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT.
INSIDE AMERICAN EDUCATION--
EXAMINING UNDERFUNDED SCHOOLS,
FAILURE FACTORIES, AND RACIAL
SEGREGATION.
AND FROM HAWAII, PRODUCING POWER
AND LIVING COMPLETELY OFF THE
ELECTRIC GRID.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT IS OPPOSING
THE RELEASE OF A DETAINEE AT THE
U.S. MILITARY PRISON IN
GUANTANAMO, BAY CUBA, WHO HAS
BEEN ON A HUNGER STRIKE FOR
EIGHT YEARS.
THE MILITARY IS FORCE-FEEDING
TARIQ BA ODAH TO KEEP HIM ALIVE.
THE 36-YEAR-OLD DETAINEE NOW
WEIGHS 74 POUNDS, ROUGHLY THE
WEIGHT OF A 10-YEAR-OLD BOY.
THAT'S LESS THAN HALF WHAT HE
WEIGHED WHEN HE WAS SENT TO
GUANTANAMO 13 YEARS AGO.
BA ODAH HAS NEVER BEEN FORMALLY
CHARGED OR CONVICTED OF A CRIME,
AND HE IS AMONG THE 52 DETAINEES
WHO HAVE BEEN CLEARED FOR
RELEASE BY A TASK FORCE OF U.S.
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCIES.
LAST NIGHT, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT FILED PAPERS IN
FEDERAL COURT OPPOSING ANY
COURT-ORDERED RELEASE FOR BA
ODAH.
HOWEVER, A DEPARTMENT SPOKESMAN
TOLD THE NEWSHOUR THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION WILL CONTINUE TO
WORK ON RESETTLING HIM IN A
COUNTRY THAT WILL TAKE HIM.
BA ODAH IS A YEMENI CITIZEN
WHOSE FAMILY LIVES IN SAUDI
ARABIA.
THIS CASE HIGHLIGHTS THE
DIFFICULTIES FOR PRESIDENT OBAMA
TO FULFILL HIS PROMISE TO EMPTY
GUANTANAMO AND CLOSE THE PRISON
BEFORE HE LEAVES OFFICE.
116 DETAINEES REMAIN.
ONLY SEVEN FACE CURRENT CHARGES,
INCLUDING FIVE MEN FOR THE
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS.
REPORTER JESS BRAVIN HAS BEEN
COVERING ISSUES RELATED TO
GUANTANAMO SINCE 2002 AND COVERS
THE US SUPREME COURT FOR "THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL."
HE IS ALSO THE AUTHOR OF "THE
TERROR COURTS: ROUGH JUSTICE AT
GUANTANAMO BAY."
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON,
D.C.
FIRST LET'S TALK ABOUT THE CLASS
OF DETAINEES THAT THIS
INDIVIDUAL FALLS INTO.
HE'S SUPPOSED TO BE ONE OF 52
WHO HAVE BEEN CLEARED FOR
TRANSFER.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
WHO CLEARED HIM?
>> WELL, MOST OF THOSE 52 MEN
WERE CLEARED IN 2009 AND 2010 BY
A TASK FORCE OF MILITARY
INTELLIGENCE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS WHO THE PRESIDENT
APPOINTED TO REVIEW THE
SITUATION AT GUATANAMO BAY.
A FEW OF THEM WERE CLEARED MORE
RECENTLY BY WHAT'S CALLED A
PERIODIC REVIEW BOARD THAT'S
SUPPOSED TO REEXAMINE THE
DETAINEES' CASES FROM TIME TO
TIME TO SEE IF THEY ARE A THREAT
TO U.S. SECURITY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IT SEEMS ON
THE ONE HAND YOU HAVE THE U.S.
STATE DEPARTMENT WHO WANTS TO
GET ON WITH THIS AND TRANSFER
THEM AWAY TO OTHER COUNTRIES.
AND THEN ON THE OTHER HAND,
YOU'VE GOT THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE FIGHTING TO KEEP THEM
THERE, OR APT LEAST NOT TO HAVE
A RULE IMPOSED TO MAKE THEM
MOVE.
>> WELL, RIGHT.
THERE'S A VERY-- THERE ARE MANY,
MANY CONTRADICTIONS YOU COULD
SAY IN AMERICA'S GUANTANAMO
POLICY.
AND THIS IS JUST ONE OF THEM.
YES, HE IS SOMEONE WHO THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT HAS SAID SHOULD BE
TRANSFERRED MORE THAN FIVE YEARS
AGO.
IN OTHER WORDS, THERE'S NO
JUSTIFICATION REALLY FOR HOLDING
HIM IN GUANTANAMO BAY.
THE REASON HE'S THERE IS
BECAUSE THE U.S. GOVERNMENT, FOR
ITS OWN POLITICAL OR DIPLOMATIC
REASONS, HASN'T BEEN ABLE TO
FIND A PLACE TO SEND HIM THAT IT
CONSIDERS SECURE ENOUGH.
SO THAT'S NOT REALLY HIS FAULT.
SO HE HAS BEEN ON HUNGER STRIKE
FOR EIGHT YEARS, AND HE HAS
FILED WHAT'S CALLED A HABEAS
CORPUS. IN FEDERAL DISTRICT
COURT.
THAT'S A LEGAL PROCESS BY WHICH
ANY PRISONER CAN CHALLENGE WHAT
THEY CONSIDER TO BE ILLEGAL
DETENTION.
SO HE HAS THIS LEGAL ACTION
GOING.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO
OPPOSE HIM, EVEN THOUGH, AS YOU
SAY, THE STATE DEPARTMENT
RECOMMENDED DROPPING THE
OPPOSITION BECAUSE THAT WOULD
HELP CLEAR THE WAY TO GET HIM
OUT OF GUANTANAMO BAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO I'M
ASSUMING THAT OTHER PRISONERS
AND THEIR LAWYERS ARE WATCHING
THIS AND PERHAPS THIS IS-- THE
PRECEDENT BEING SET IF THIS
HABUS CORPUS WAS HANDED DOWN, IF
HE WAS I GUESS COMPELLED TO BE
TRANSFERRED, THAT IS WHAT IS THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DOES NOT
WANT BECAUSE EVERY OTHER
DETAINEE WOULD LINE UP.
>> WELL, THEY DON'T WANT TO
ENCOURAGE OTHER DETAINEES TO
PERSIST IN HUNGER STRIKES,
ALTHOUGH THEY DON'T NEED A LOT
OF ENCOURAGEMENT.
MANY HAVE BEEN ON HUNGER STRIKE
FOR A LONG TIME.
THEY DON'T LIKE TO BE TOLD WHO
TO DO.
HOWEVER, AS A BINDING LEGAL
MATTER IT'S NOT PRECEDENT IN
THAT SENSE.
IN OTHER WORDS, JUST BECAUSE THE
GOVERNMENT CHOOSES NOT TO OPPOSE
HIS PETITION DOES NOT MEAN THAT
ANY OTHER PRISONER WHO FILES A
SIMILAR LEGAL ACTION
AUTOMATICALLY GETS THE SAME
TREATMENT.
THEY CAN CHOOSE TO OPPOSE OR NOT
OPPOSE EACH PETITION
INDIVIDUALLY, AND IT DOES NOT
CREATE A BINDING LEGAL
PRECEDENT.
BUT IN GENERAL, THE DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT, AREN'T IN THE
BUSINESS OF ACQUIESCING TO WHAT
PRISONERS WANT.
IF THEY ARE GOING TO TRANSFER
THIS DETAINEE, THEY WANT TO DO
IT ON THEIR TERMS, NOT BECAUSE
THERE'S A COURT ORDER THAT'S
HASTENING THE WAY.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT FEELS THAT
THE COURT ORDER WOULD REMOVE A
NUMBER OF OBSTACLES THAT
CONGRESS IMPOSED ON DETAINEE
TRANSFERS AFTER PRESIDENT OBAMA
TOOK OFFICE, AND IT WOULD MAKE
IT SOMEWHAT EASIER TO GET THIS
GUY WHO NOW WEIGHS ABOUT 75
POUNDS OUT OF DETENTION AND INTO
SOME OTHER COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK.
THAT.
I MEAN, HE'S BEING KEPT ALIVE
THROUGH FORCED FEEDING.
DESCRIBE THIS PROCESS.
I MEAN, HE CAN'T ABE HEALTHY
HUMAN BEING AT 75 POUNDS.
>> WELL, THAT'S ABOUT HALF OF
HIS TYPICAL WEIGHT, OR HIS
NORMAL WEIGHT, ACCORDING TO THE
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT.
I MEAN, THE ONLY INFORMATION WE
HAVE ON HIS CONDITION IS FROM
THE GOVERNMENT.
IT'S A DAILY PROCESS WHERE
YOU'RE STRAPPED TO A CHAIR AND A
FEEDING TUBE IS INSERTED IN YOUR
NOSE AND A SORT OF ENSURE-LIKE
LIQUID IS PUMPED INTO YOU.
ACTUALLY, RIGHT NOW, THERE IS A
COURT ACTION THAT'S BEEN FILED
BY A NUMBER OF NEWS
ORGANIZATIONS, INCLUDING THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," THAT IS
SEEKING TO HAVE VIDEOTAPES OF
THE FORCE FEEDING PROCESS OF A
DIFFERENT DETAINEE RELEASED SO
THE PUBLIC CAN SEE FOR ITSELF
HOW HUMANE THIS PROCESS IS.
DETAINEES SAY IT'S NOT.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THAT IT IS.
>> Sreenivasan: JESS BRAVIN OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> OF COURSE.
>> Sreenivasan: CHINESE STATE
MEDIA REPORTS THE DEATH TOLL
FROM THIS WEEK'S CHEMICAL
WAREHOUSE EXPLOSION IN THE PORT
CITY OF TIANJIN HAS RISEN ABOVE
100, WITH 21 FIREFIGHTERS AMONG
THE FATALITIES.
FIREFIGHTERS CONTINUE TO BATTLE
FIRES FROM SMALL EXPLOSIONS AND
SEARCH FOR SURVIVORS.
TODAY, RESCUERS DISCOVERED A 50-
YEAR-OLD MAN FOUND INSIDE A
SHIPPING CONTAINER.
CHINESE OFFICIALS DENY ISSUING
AN EVACUATION ORDER NEAR THE
BLAST SITE.
BUT A TWO MILE AREA HAS BEEN
CORDONED OFF.
40 PEOPLE TRYING TO CROSS THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA FROM LIBYA TO
ITALY WERE FOUND DEAD TODAY ON
THEIR BOAT.
ITALIAN OFFICIALS BELIEVE THEY
DIED FROM INHALING FUEL FUMES.
THE ITALIAN NAVY RESCUED 320
OTHER MIGRANTS TODAY.
250,000 MIGRANTS, MAINLY FROM
AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST, HAVE
CROSSED TO EUROPE THIS YEAR.
MORE THAN 2,300 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
MAKING THE TRIP.
SEA RESCUES THIS SUMMER ARE
APPROACHING 1,000 MIGRANTS A DAY
OFF OF ITALY AND GREECE.
THE SECRET SERVICE CONFIRMS TO
THE NEWSHOUR IT IS EMBARKING ON
AN AGGRESSIVE HIRING PLAN.
REUTERS REPORTED TODAY THE
AGENCY PLANS TO HIRE 700 NEW
UNIFORMED OFFICERS AND 400
SPECIAL AGENTS OVER THE NEXT
FIVE YEARS.
THAT WOULD EXPAND SECRET SERVICE
STAFF BY 17% FROM ITS CURRENT
6,600 EMPLOYEES.
THE HIRING SPREE COMES IN
RESPONSE TO SECURITY BREACHES AT
THE WHITE HOUSE AND AGENTS BEING
CAUGHT WITH PROSTITUTES ON A
PRESIDENTIAL TRIP TO COLOMBIA.
A NEW STUDY SUGGESTS POLICE
OFFICERS MAY BE MORE LIKELY TO
BE KILLED IN THE LINE OF DUTY IN
STATES WITH HIGHER RATES OF GUN
OWNERSHIP.
THE STUDY PUBLISHED BY "THE
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PUBLIC
HEALTH" REVIEWED AN F.B.I.
DATABASE OF 782 POLICE HOMICIDES
BETWEEN 1996 AND 2010.
IT FOUND ALABAMA, ARKANSAS,
IDAHO, MISSISSIPPI, AND MONTANA
AMONG THE STATES WITH THE
HIGHEST RATE OF POLICE HOMICIDES
AND GUN OWNERSHIP.
STATES WITH THE LOWEST
PERCENTAGE OF GUN OWNERS, LIKE
CONNECTICUT, NEW YORK, NEW
JERSEY, MASSACHUSETTS, AND RHODE
ISLAND, WERE AMONG STATES WITH
THE LOWEST RATE OF POLICE
HOMICIDES.
WYOMING HAD THE HIGHEST RATE OF
GUN OWNERSHIP IN THE U.S. BUT NO
POLICE HOMICIDES IN THE PERIOD
STUDIED.
92% OF POLICE HOMICIDES WERE
COMMITTED WITH GUNS.
10 DAYS AFTER A SPILL OF MINE
WASTE WATER, COLORADO'S ANIMUS
RIVER IS OPEN AGAIN TO
RECREATIONAL USE.
COLORADO'S DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT SAID
YESTERDAY THE CONTAMINATION
LEVELS ARE BELOW WHAT MIGHT HURT
HUMAN HEALTH.
TO UNDERSCORE THE POINT, EARLIER
THIS WEEK, GOVERNOR JOHN
HICKENLOOPER PUT A BACTERIA-
KILLING IODINE TABLET IN A
BOTTLE OF RIVER WATER AND DRANK
IT.
THE RIVER HAD TURNED ORANGE
AFTER A CLEAN-UP CREW
ACCIDENTALLY BREACHED A DAM
HOLDING BACK METALS USED IN GOLD
MINING.
THREE MILLIONS GALLONS OF
CONTAMINATED WATER SPILLED INTO
THE RIVER, BUT HAVE SINCE BEEN
DILUTED.
DOWNSTREAM NEW MEXICO HAS LIFTED
A BAN ON DRINKING WATER FROM
WELLS IN THE ANIMUS RIVER
VALLEY.
TAKE AN IN-DEPTH LOOK AT FOLKSY
COMEDIAN WILL ROGERS ON THE 80th
ANNIVERSARY OF HIS DEATH.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NATIONAL
DEBATE OVER EDUCATION QUALITY,
INTEGRATION, AND FUNDING IS
PLAYING OUT IN TWO STATES THIS
WEEK: WASHINGTON AND FLORIDA.
WE BEGIN WITH WASHINGTON STATE,
WHERE STATE LEADERS WILL MEET
MONDAY TO BEGIN ADDRESSING
INEQUITIES IN PUBLIC SCHOOL
FUNDING.
THE MOVE COMES AFTER THE STATE
SUPREME COURT IMPOSED A
$100,000-A-DAY FINE THIS WEEK,
BECAUSE THE JUDGES SAY,
KINDERGARTEN-THROUGH-12th GRADE
EDUCATION IS INSUFFICIENTLY
FUNDED.
THE COURT SAID THE STATE NEEDS
TO DO MORE TO REDUCE CLASS SIZE,
EXPAND KINDERGARTEN, AND RAISE
TEACHER PAY.
OTHER STATES, SUCH AS KANSAS,
OHIO, AND NEW JERSEY, HAVE ALSO
BEEN EMBROILED IN COURT FIGHTS
OVER SCHOOL FUNDING.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
PROBLEMS IN WASHINGTON STATE IS
"SEATTLE TIMES" REPORTER JOSEPH
O'SULLIVAN.
SO WE'RE ALL PAYING ATTENTION TO
THE $100,000-A-DAY FINE.
THAT SEEMS LIKE STICKER SHOCK TO
A VIEWER OR AUDIENCE MEMBER BUT
THIS HAS BEEN A LONG TIME
COMING.
HOW DID WE GET HERE?
>> SO THE WASHINGTON STATE
CONSTITUTION SAYS EXPRESSLY THAT
EDUCATION IS THE QUOTE, UNQUOTE,
PARAMOUNT DUTY OF THE STATE TO
PROVIDE FOR.
A FAMILY SUED THE STATE, ALONG
WITH SOME SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND
TEACHERS UNIONS SAYING THAT THE
STATE WAS UNDERFUNDING.
AND IT MADE ITS WAY TO THE
SUPREME COURT WHICH IN 1212
AGREED SAYING THE STATE WAS
UNCONSTITUTIONALLY UNDERFUNDING
THE SCHOOL SYSTEM.
SO THE COURT IMPOSED A 2018
DEADLINE FOR THE STATE TO COME
UP WITH MORE FUNDING AND FIX
SOME SPECIFIC PROBLEMS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO HERE WE ARE
NOW, THE COURTS-- THE JUDGES
BASICALLY SAY THEY'RE COMPLETELY
DISSATISFIED.
THEY'RE SLAPPING THIS
SIGNIFICANT FINE ON THEM, BUT IT
DOESN'T SEEM TO HAVE CAUSED THE
TYPE OF DETERRENT WE THINK.
IN YOUR REPORTING, YOU SAY SOME
OF THE LEGISLATORS SAY LET'S
KEEP RACKING UP THE FINES UNTIL
JANUARY BALL BECAUSE THAT WILL
STILL ONLY ADD UP TO $14 MILLION
VERSUS WHAT WE HAVE TO FUND THIS
THING BY.
>> SURE, THAT'S THE THING.
THE PENALTY IS SYMBOLIC BECAUSE
$14 MILLION IN A BUDGET $38
BILLION LARGE ISN'T THAT MUCH
MONEY, AND THE PROBLEM IS
SIGNIFICANTLY BIGGER IN THE
PORTION OF THE COURT'S DECISION
ON TEACHER COMPENSATION.
IT'S GOING TO BE ABOUT $3.5
BILLION EVERY TWO-YEAR BUDGET
CYCLE TO FIX.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, SO WHAT
ARE SOME OF THE INEQUITIES?
WHAT'S AT THE CORE OF THIS?
WHAT SORT OF PROGRAMS ARE
MISSING.
IS THERE INEQUITY FROM ONE
NEIGHBORHOOD TO ONE COMMUNITY TO
THE OTHER.
>> THE STATE LEGISLATURE HAS
PROVIDED MORE MONEY FOR TRORS
COSTS AND OPERATION SUPPLIES.
THEY'VE PUT MONEY INTO FUNDING
ALL-DAY KINDERGARTEN, AND
KINDERGARTEN-THREE CLASS-SIZE
REDUCTION.
ONE OF PIECES HANGING OUT THERE
IS THE STATE ISN'T FUNDING
TEACHER PAY ENOUGH.
IN WASHINGTON STATE, LOCAL
PROPERTY TAX LEVIES PROVIDE
SUPPLEMENTAL FUNDING FOR TEACHER
PAY, SO LOCAL SCHOOL DISTRICTS
WIND UP COMING UP WITH MORE
MONEY TO PAY THEIR TEACHERS.
AND SEE THAT'S ONE OF THE BIG
INEQUALITY QUESTIONS.
POORER SCHOOL DISTRICTS THAT
DON'T HAVE AS WEALTHY RESIDENTS
AND GOOD PROPERTY TAX LEVIES,
THEY CAN'T PROVIDE FUNDING FOR
THEIR TEACHERS AS EASILY AS A
WEALTHY DISTRICT CAN.
AND SO THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT LAWMAKERS ARE GOING TO HAVE
TO FIGURE OUT.
AND IT'S KIND OF-- ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT'S BEING TALKED ABOUT
IS A PROPERTY TAX LEVY SWAP
WHEREBY SOME OF THE RICHER
DISTRICTS WOULD SEND MONEY-- PAY
MORE MONEY AND SEND THAT MONEY
TO THE POORER DISTRICTS BUT
THAT'S VERY POLITICALLY
COMPLICATED TO DO BECAUSE IT'S,
YOU KNOW, POLITICALLY TRICKY FOR
EVERYBODY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHERE ELSE IS
THIS HAPPENING?
OR IS THIS JUST PECULIAR TO
WASHINGTON STATE BECAUSE OF HOW
THE CONSTITUTION'S WRITTEN?
>> SO, THESE HAVE PLAYED OUT IN
A LOT OF STATES.
ABOUT 45 STATES HAVE HAD SOME
KIND OF LITIGATION BEFORE.
FOR WASHINGTON STATE, WE
ACTUALLY HAD A SIMILAR CASE BACK
IN THE 70s TO DEAL WITH
TEACHER COMPENSATION AND LOCAL
PROPERTY TAX LEVIES.
SO IT'S NOT SUPER UNUSUAL.
WHAT IS UNUSUAL FOR US THIS TIME
IS THAT IT'S THE FIRST TIME THE
STATE HAS SANCTIONED-- THE COURT
HAS SANCTIONED THE STATE AND
FINED THE STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT
JOSEPH O'SULLIVAN FROM "THE
SEATTLE TIMES," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: TURNING NOW TO
FLORIDA THIS WEEK, THE "TAMPA
BAY TIMES" PUBLISHED AN
INVESTIGATION OF FIVE ELEMENTARY
SCHOOLS IN LOW-INCOME,
PREDOMINANTLY BLACK
NEIGHBORHOODS OF ST. PETERSBURG,
IN PINELLAS COUNTY.
THE NEWSPAPER LABELS THE SCHOOLS
"FAILURE FACTORIES" AND BLAMES,
IN PART, RACIAL RE-SEGREGATION
OVER THE PAST EIGHT YEARS.
AMONG THE FINDINGS:
LAST YEAR 95% OF THE BLACK
CHILDREN FAILED STANDARDIZED
READING AND MATH TESTS, AND 52%
OF TEACHERS ASKED FOR A JOB
TRANSFER.
REPORTER MICHAEL LAFORGIA CO-
WROTE THE STORY.
HE JOINS ME NOW.
SO, YOU KNOW, LET'S INOCULATE
SOME OF THE BASIC RESERVATIONS
THAT COME UP WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
STORIES LIKE THIS.
THAT THIS IS' POVERTY PROBLEM
AND YOU REPORT THIS IS NOT.
WHY?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
FROM OUR REPORTING WE LOOKED AT
ANY MEASURE THAT YOU CAN THINK
OF-- ANY SOCIOECONOMIC
MEASURE THAT YOU CAN THINK OF
A NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE LOOKED AT THE LEVELS OF
POVERTY, MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD
INCOME, RATES OF COLLEGE
GRADUATION, RATES OF
SINGLE-PARENT HOMES, AND BY ANY
MEASURE WE COULD FIND, PINNELLAS
COUNTY, FLORIDA, FALLS DEAD IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE PACK OF ALL
FLORIDA COUNTIES.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT IT'S STILL
PRODUCING THESE FAILURE FACTORS.
ANOTHER RESERVATION IS PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO SAY, YOU KNOW WHAT?
IT'S THE PARENTS' PROBLEM.
THE KIDS WEREN'T READY TO START
SCHOOL.
HAD THEY GOT THERE THEY WERE
ALREADY BEHIND.
BUT YOU FOUND OUT--
>> THAT'S RIGHT, THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THAT'S PROBABLY THE MOST
COMMON THING YOU HEAR WHEN
YOU'RE DOING A STORY LIKE THIS.
WHAT WE DID IS WE ANALYZED A
BATCH OF KINDERGARTEN-READINESS
DATA, TESTS THAT KIDS TAKE WHEN
THEY'RE COMING INTO KINDERGARTEN
TO SEE HOW PREPARED THEY ARE
SHOWING UP FOR SCHOOL.
AND WHAT WE FOUND WAS THAT OUR
KIDS IN THESE SCHOOLS WERE NO
LESS PREPARED THAN CHILDREN IN
SCORES OF OTHER SCHOOLS ACROSS
FLORIDA BUT IT WAS ONLY AFTER A
FEW YEARS IN THESE FIVE SCHOOLS
THAT THEY WERE FALLING
DRAMATICALLY BEHIND.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THESE FIVE
SCHOOLS WERE NOT ALWAYS THAT
WAY.
YOU TRACE IS BACK TO SOMETHING
THAT HAPPENED EIGHT YEARS AGO.
WHY DO YOU THINK THAT
RESEGREGATION IS LEADING TO
THESE PROBLEMS?
>> WELL, I MEAN, THIS ABSOLUTELY
WAS A RECENT PHENOMENON.
EIGHT YEARS AGO, SCHOOLS WERE
ABOUT AVERAGE.
KIDS WERE PERFORMING MUCH
BETTER, AND THEN OUR SCHOOL
BOARD VOTED FAIR PLAN THAT
EFFECTIVELY RESEGREGATED THE
SCHOOLS.
IT ENDED INTEGRATION EFFORTS AND
CREATED A SITUATION WHERE
CHILDREN IN PREDOMINANTLY BLACK
NEIGHBORHOODS WERE SUDDENLY
GOING TO PREDOMINANTLY BLACK
SCHOOLS.
THEY KNEW THAT THIS WAS GOING TO
HAPPEN WHEN THEY MADE THIS
DECISION.
AND IN ORDER TO MAKE IT GO DOWN
EASIER, THEY PROMISED THAT THESE
SCHOOLS WOULD BE FLOODED WITH
MONEY AND RESOURCES.
>> Sreenivasan: DID THAT
HAPPEN.
>> SOCIAL WORKERS, COUNSELORS,
THAT TYPE OF THING.
NO, THAT NEVER HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DID
HAPPEN AS A RESULT?
>> WELL, AS A RESULT, THE
SCHOOLS GOT A LITTLE BIT WORSE
ACADEMICALLY, AND A LITTLE BIT
MORE DISORDERED AND CHAOTIC YEAR
AFTER YEAR AFTER YEAR.
TEACHERS FLED.
KIDS BEGAN NOT TO FEEL SAFE IN
CLASS, AND WE GOT TO THE
SITUATION WHERE WE ARE TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: YOUR REPORTING
ALSO HIGHLIGHTS THAT THERE ARE
OTHER COUNTIES IN FLORIDA THAT
MIGHT BE STATISTICALLY WORSE OFF
BUT ARE HAVING BETTER OUTCOMES
BECAUSE THEY'RE DOING THINGS
THAT THIS COUNTY IS NOT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU SEE IN BROWARD COUNTY, FOR
EXAMPLE, THEY CREATED AN OFFICE
DEDICATED SLOWLY TO RAISING THE
ACHIEVEMENT LEVELS OF BLACK
MALES.
THEY TRACK THEIR STUDENTS'
PROGRESS IN REAL TIME.
OWNER COUNTY HAS A SIMILAR
OFFICE THAT TARGETS MINORITY
ACHIEVEMENT.
DEVAL COUNTY IS PAYING TEACHERS
$20,000 A PIECE IN INCENTIVE PAY
TO WORK IN HIGH-RISK SCHOOLS.
PINNELLAS COUNTY HASN'T TRIED
ANY OF THOSE THINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT
MICHAEL LaFORGIA OF THE "TAMPA
BAY TIMES," THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: IN TROPICAL
HAWAII, 12% OF PRIVATE HOMES
HAVE INSTALLED SOLAR PANELS, THE
HIGHEST RATE IN THE NATION.
MOST HAWAIIAN HOMES WITH PANELS
REMAIN TIED TO THE ELECTRICAL
GRID TO STORE THE ENERGY THEY
PRODUCE.
BUT AS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MIKE TAIBBI
REPORTS, OTHER RESIDENTS
PRODUCING THEIR OWN POWER ARE
NOW OFF THE GRID.
>> Reporter: THE SUBURBAN
STREETS OUTSIDE OF HONOLULU ARE
A DENSE NETWORK OF HOUSES,
BUT IN THIS NEIGHBORHOOD ONE
HOUSE IS COMPLETELY INDEPENDENT-
- THAT IS, ENERGY INDEPENDENT
>> NOMINAL VOLTAGE, 48 VOLTS.
THESE ARE MY CHARGE CONTROLLERS,
THESE ARE MY INVERTERS.
>> Reporter: FOR THE LAST TWO
YEARS, DAVE GREEN, A HEATING AND
AIR CONDITIONING SPECIALIST,
HASN'T PAID ONE CENT IN
ELECTRICITY BILLS.
INSTEAD HE RELIES ON HIGH END
BATTERIES TO STORE THE POWER
GENERATED BY HIS SOLAR PANELS.
WHEN HE FIRST CUT TIES WITH THE
GRID HE HAD TO CONVINCE HIS WIFE
AND DAUGHTERS TO CONSERVE ENERGY
TO MAKE SURE THEY'D HAVE ENOUGH
JUICE TO MEET THEIR NEEDS.
>> DAD WAS ALWAYS SAYING, "IF
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO USE THAT,
SHUT IT OFF," OR ONLY USE THAT
FOR THIS MUCH, YOU KNOW?
DON'T YOU KNOW THE SUN DIDN'T
SHINE TODAY?
WE NEED TO DO THIS AND THAT
YOU'RE ALWAYS MANAGING THE
POWER.
BUT EVENTUALLY YOU GET TO THE
POINT WHERE YOU DON'T REALLY
NEED TO MANAGE IT.
YOU KNOW YOU HAVE ENOUGH LEEWAY
WHERE YOU COULD GO, "OH I LEFT
THE LIGHT ON.
WELL IT DOESN'T MATTER," BECAUSE
WE'VE GOT PLENTY OF POWER.
>> Reporter: GREENE DOESN'T
CONSIDER HIMSELF AN
ENVIRONMENTALIST AND HE SAYS
DEFECTING FROM THE GRID HAS BEEN
A HOBBY MORE THAN A STATEMENT,
LIKE IMPROVING THE 40 PLUS MPG
HIS PRIUS WAS ALREADY GETTING BY
ADDING EVEN MORE BATTERIES.
>> IT'S GETTING ABOUT 87 MILES
TO THE GALLON.
>> Reporter: GREENE ESTIMATES
HE'S SPENT AROUND $50,000 ON THE
CONTINUING EXPERIMENT IN SELF-
RELIANCE HE CALLS A HOBBY.
HE SAYS THE SYSTEM WILL PAY FOR
ITSELF WITHIN SIX TO EIGHT
YEARS.
>> THIS DOES ALL THE CONTROLS,
ALL THE OPERATIONS.
>> Reporter: AND IT'S MORE THAN
WORTH IT TO KNOW THAT HE'S IN
CONTROL OF HIS OWN ENERGY.
>> IT'S A NEAT FEELING.
I LIKE THE FEELING OF KNOWING
THAT IF THE PRICE OF ENERGY WERE
TO GO UP, OR IF GAS WERE TO
DOUBLE, I'D BE LIKE, "SO?"
>> Reporter: HENK ROGERS,
ANOTHER GRID DEFECTOR OVER ON
THE BIG ISLAND OF HAWAII,
REMEMBERS THE CONFUSION CAUSED
BY HIS DECISION TO CUT TIES WITH
THE UTILITY.
>> I HAD A VERY INTERESTING
PHONE CALL AND IT GOES SOMETHING
LIKE THIS: "IS THIS MR. ROGERS?
YES.
THIS IS SO AND SO FROM THE
ELECTRIC COMPANY.
THERE SEEMS TO BE SOMETHING
WRONG WITH OUR METER."
AND I SAID, "NO, THERE'S NOTHING
WRONG WITH YOUR METER.
I'M JUST NOT USING ANY OF YOUR
ELECTRICITY."
>> Reporter: FOR ROGERS, ENERGY
INDEPENDENCE IS NO HOBBY.
HE'S SPENT A CHUNK OF THE
FORTUNE HE AMASSED LICENSING THE
SEMINAL VIDEO GAME TETRIS
EXPERIMENTING WITH WAYS TO
DISCONNECT HIS 32-ACRE RANCH
FROM THE GRID.
>> THIS IS THE ENERGY LAB.
>> Reporter: AN INDUSTRIAL SCALE
ARRAY OF 360 CUTTING EDGE SOLAR
PANELS.
>> WE HAVE 85 KILOWATTS PEAK
POWER, 360 PANELS ON THIS ROOF.
>> Reporter: THE LATEST IN
ENERGY STORAGE TECHNOLOGY.
>> SO THESE ARE THE BATTERIES,
THEY'RE CHARGING NOW.
THEY ARE AT 91% RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: EVEN AN
ELECTROLYZER TO MAKE USE OF ANY
EXTRA POWER HIS SYSTEM
GENERATES.
>> WHEN WE'RE DONE FILLING THE
BATTERIES, THEN WE START
PRODUCING HYDROGEN.
THIS IS HYDROGEN.
THIS IS OXYGEN.
IT'S HIGH SCHOOL CHEMISTRY.
SO THIS IS OUR HYDROGEN FUELING
STATION.
>> Reporter: HYDROGEN CAN BE
USED TO RUN VEHICLES AND
MACHINERY.
ROGERS USES IT THAT WAY, AND HE
USES HIS OWN INTRICATE AND
EXPENSIVE EXPERIMENT IN OFF THE
GRID LIVING TO PRESS HOME A
POINT.
>> WE'RE EXPERIMENTING WITH ALL
THIS BECAUSE WE CAN, AND BECAUSE
I WANT TO AND IT'S THE RIGHT
THING TO DO.
>> Reporter: ROGERS IS CONFIDENT
THAT AS ENERGY STORAGE
TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES, THE NUMBER
OF RESIDENTS CHOOSING TO MOVE
OFF OF THE ELECTRICAL GRID WILL
INCREASE.
>> OKAY, SO I'M A HIGHER NET
WORTH INDIVIDUAL.
I CAN AFFORD TO DO THIS.
BUT IT'S ONLY A MATTER OF TIME
BEFORE EVERYONE CAN AFFORD TO DO
THIS.
AND WHEN THEY CAN, THEY WILL.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE WE FIRST
REPORTED THIS STORY, TETRIS
COMPANY FOUNDER HENK ROGERS HAS
STARTED A BUSINESS TO SELL AND
INSTALL BATTERY SYSTEMS FOR
HOMES AND BUSINESSES RUNNING ON
SOLAR ENERGY.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
TOMORROW, OUR REPORTING FROM
HAWAII CONTINUES, WHERE THE
POPULARITY OF RESIDENTIAL SOLAR
PANELS HAS LED THE RENEWABLE
ENERGY INDUSTRY TO A CROSSROADS.
>> SO WE DRIVE UP, AND YOU HAVE
THESE LOVELY SOLAR PANELS ON
YOUR ROOF.
HOW'S THAT WORKING OUT FOR YOU?
>> IT'S NOT!
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY
TONIGHT, A WEEK-LONG HEAT WAVE
IN EGYPT HAS LEFT AT LEAST 93
PEOPLE DEAD.
IT WAS 104 DEGREES IN CAIRO
TODAY, AND TEMPERATURES REACHED
117 DEGREES IN SOME PART OF
EGYPT THIS WEEK.
AND IT WAS 50 YEARS AGO TODAY
THE BEATLES CAME TO PLAY AT SHEA
STADIUM IN NEW YORK.
55,000 FANS WERE THERE.
THE BAND'S HALF-HOUR SET WAS THE
FIRST ROCK CONCERT TO FILL A
SPORTS ARENA.
ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM, SPYING ON
AMERICA'S E-MAILS AND CELL
PHONES.
WE TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT
REVELATIONS BEHIND A UNIQUE
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY AND TELECOM
GIANT AT&T.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.